Sukumaran, Myuran (Myu) (1981–2015)
Myuran Sukumaran and Andrew Chan went to the same school, but a few years apart, and could never have known then how their lives would become intertwined. That they would smuggle drugs together, be sentenced to death together, appeal together and finally end together.Myuran Sukumaran was born on April 17, 1981 in London, the first of three children of Sri Lankan parents, Sam and Raji Sukumaran. The family came to Australia in 1985 and Myuran attended Homebush Boys High School, where he was known as "Myu" and was considered courteous, reserved and quiet.After leaving school, he was a mail-room clerk at a finance company, studied martial arts – although he was often described as an "expert", he claimed to have studied for only three months – and drifted into drug use. He admitted that he had an explosive temper. He met Andrew Chan at a party and soon they were smuggling drugs home from Indonesia.In April 2005, Sukumaran was part of the group that became known as the Bali nine, young Australians in Bali attempting to transport back 8.3 kilograms of the drug taped to their bodies. The group didn't know that the Australian Federal Police had already alerted the Bali police with the names of eight of them.The only name not known to the police was Sukumaran. In Bali they called him "the black one" or "the negro" and thought he was Chan's bodyguard, as Chan seemed to be doing most of the organising.Once Sukumaran was arrested, on his 24th birthday as the group was trying to leave the country, the others dobbed him in. He gave no evidence, even in court, and claimed to have suffered amnesia. He often hinted at threats to his family if he ever spoke.At their trials in 2006, Sukumaran and Chan were sentenced to death by firing squad. The judges said that neither Sukumaran nor Chan had shown any regret for trafficking enough heroin to kill, the judges estimated, 8200 people. Sukumaran and Chan were the first Australians to be sentenced to death in Indonesia, and the first death sentences given by the Bali court. Their many appeals were rejected over the years and they stayed on in Bali's Kerobokan Prison.Inside Kerobokan, Sukumaran mentored other prisoners, helped to teach English and ran computer, graphic design and art classes. The computers, without internet access, were funded by a number of Melbourne criminal lawyers.In a new scheme at the prison, Sukumaran was also appointed a "kelian banjar", the leader of a group of about 20 prisoners, including some who had also been given death sentences, in the maximum security wing. His role was to give out tasks, talk with the guards, try to resolve disputes and have some part in overseeing less serious penalties given to other prisoners.Sukumaran also took up art, becoming a proficient painter. He sold his work outside the prison, as inmates were allowed to raise money to feed themselves and buy necessities. Australian artist Ben Quilty became a supporter of Sukumaran and said of his art progress, "In my life I've only ever seen one other artist make this seismic progress at such dizzying pace but she was living in Melbourne with money, a beautiful home and studio."Sukumaran had a solo show in Melbourne in 2014 and was studying for a Bachelor of Fine Arts by correspondence through Curtin University. He was due to finish at the end of this year.Myuran Sukumaran is survived by his parents, Sam and Raji, and siblings Brintha and Chintu​.Harriet Veitch, 'Sukumaran, Myuran (Myu) (1981–2015)', Obituaries Australia, National Centre of Biography, Australian National University, http://oa.anu.edu.au/obituary/sukumaran-myuran-myu-20233/text31288, accessed 9 July 2019.© Copyright Obituaries Australia, 2010-2019
17 April 1981  London, Middlesex, England

29 April 2015  Indonesia executedAn initiative of the National Centre of Biography at the Australian National University© Copyright Obituaries Australia, 2010-2019
Benaud, Richard (Richie) (1930–2015)
Richie Benaud, 1959National Archives of Australia, A1200, L33209Richie Benaud was an all-time great all-rounder cricketer, a crafty leg-spinner who captured 248 wickets in 63 Tests, an attacking lower-order batsman who hit one of the fastest Test centuries, a brilliant gully fielder with amazing reflexes and a crowd puller wherever he played. He was also a courageous and victorious leader of men, who lost neither a Test series nor his cool.He was the first cricketer to achieve the Test double of 2000 runs and 200 wickets and, as an all-rounder, ranks as one of the greatest. He also played a stellar role in the formation of World Series Cricket in 1977, which changed the face of international cricket, and, as a television commentator, became "the voice of cricket".Richard Benaud was born in Penrith on October 6, 1930, the first of two sons of Lou Benaud, of French descent, and his wife, Irene (nee Saville). As a teenager, Lou had played cricket, but his bigger contribution was encouraging his sons Richie and John (also a Test cricketer) to play single-handed cricket by bowling a tennis ball against a wall and hitting it on the rebound.Richie played his first competition match for Jugiong School when he was six. At eight, he represented the First XI of Burnside School near Parramatta and later led the team to a competition win. The great Australian spinner Clarrie Grimmett was his inspiration and he recalls in Willow Patterns (1969), "I think it was the avid watching of Grimmett more than any one thing that made me want to be a leg-spinner." Thinking Richie's hands were not large enough, Lou did not allow him to bowl leg-spinners until he was 17. Instead, emphasis was kept on line and length. He was promoted to first-grade for Central Cumberland at 16 and made a brilliant 98 in his second match. However, the way to the top was not easy.There was a cracked skull, a broken thumb, a crushed finger and a ball in the mouth. But nothing could dent his determination to succeed.The skull-cracking episode occurred when he was batting for NSW Second XI in Melbourne as a teenager. He was out of cricket for a year but it left no psychological scar.Benaud's Test debut against the West Indies, in January 1952 in Sydney, was not impressive. Nor did he shine out in the Tests against South Africa in 1952-53. However, he had magical moments as a batsman in first-class matches on the 1953 tour of England. Former cricketer, now broadcasterHe had improved his batting stance by seeking Keith Miller's advice and practiced in front of a mirror. He hit a dazzling 121 in the Kingston Test against West Indies in 1955. His century came in 78 minutes, then the third fastest Test century. This onslaught prompted a Jamaican barracker to shout, "Do it to England, maan, not to us."In the 1956 Lord's Test, Benaud hit a magnificent 97 and took what is described as the catch of the century when he snapped Colin Cowdrey in the gully.Benaud rates this Test as one of his most enjoyable games and, as for the Cowdrey catch, he said "good as it looked, I never saw the ball other than as a blur from the moment it left Cowdrey's bat."The same year Australia toured Pakistan and India. Shortening his run-up to save energy, Benaud took 7 for 72 in the Madras Test – his best Test figures – as Australia won by an innings.Then followed his most successful tour to South Africa in 1957-58.In the fourth Test, in Johannesburg, Benaud he scored 100 and grabbed nine wickets. He totalled 329 runs in five Tests and captured 30 wickets contributing to Australia's 3-0 win.Bob Simpson recalls: "His practice sessions on that tour had to be seen to be believed. He laboured long after other players had left practice; a lonely figure bowling with a youngster to retrieve the balls aimed at a handkerchief placed on a good length spot. His legendary accuracy developed here."Benaud was appointed captain against England in 1958-59 and regained the Ashes 4-0. He had pre-Test match meetings where every player's viewpoint was considered and grievances settled, and the excellent team spirit that existed was clear to the spectators. The fall of a wicket was greeted by ecstatic scenes in the middle, with the players swarming in to hug the bowler or fielder. Thus Benaud could be called the father of modern cricket with its extrovert expressions.Benaud retained the Ashes in England in 1961 and in Australia in 1962-63.Throughout the 1961 tour of England, Richie's right shoulder troubled him. Yet in the fourth Test in Manchester he converted a certain defeat into a victory. England was set 256 runs to win and was galloping towards victory at 1 for 150. It was then that Benaud produced his piece de resistance.
Churcher, Elizabeth Ann (Betty) (1931–2015)
Betty Churcher, by Greg Barrett, 1993National Library of Australia, 11653530She was the public face of art in Australia, famous for bringing culture to the masses through blockbuster exhibitions and television shows.But Betty Churcher, who died on Tuesday aged 84, was just as committed in her private life to thinking, writing and above all talking about the subject she loved most.The former director of the National Gallery of Australia is remembered as a seminal figure in the arts sector, a superior curator and administrator as well as a gifted communicator who introduced Australians to the world of art outside the national collections.As director of the NGA from 1990 to 1997, she was an indomitable character who set out, right from the start, to put the gallery on the map.She changed its name from the Australian National Gallery to its current title, the National Gallery of Australia – a symbolic shift in direction, bringing it in line with other international institutions.It was also in keeping with her strategy to bring the outside art world into Australia.Famously dubbed "Blockbuster Betty", she presided over 12 international shows in seven years, bringing queues to the gallery the likes of which had never been seen before.It's a reputation she always professed to be perfectly proud of, even if she once had her detractors. And the gallery has been staging successful international shows ever since, not least 2010's Masterpieces from Paris, which broke all Australian records for crowds and revenue."Why I think it's so wonderful is we can never, in this country, own a lot of those great masterpieces, because we started too late, for one thing. So by the time the Australian gallery started the European galleries had stuffed their cellars full of all the great masterpieces," she said in 2011.Not only did the crowds love the shows, they were also motivated to look at the rest of the gallery and the permanent collection, as well as bringing tourist dollars into the capital.After leaving the gallery in 1997 and settling in Wamboin, a village just outside Canberra, she remained committed to bringing art to the masses and ensuring that as many people as possible could enjoy the world's great artworks.An unmistakeable figure with her trademark silver bob and high cheekbones, she hosted a television program on ABC, Hidden Treasures, for some years and later wrote several books about her travels around the world's great art galleries.Notebooks, published in 2011, was a journey through some of Europe's greatest galleries, undertaken as her sight was deteriorating.A melanoma had robbed her right eye of its vision and she later developed macular degeneration in the left. In 2006, she decided to take a last trip to Europe and commit to memory some of her favourite paintings while she still could.In Notebooks, she published her own sketches alongside images of the works themselves – a lifelong habit that had always ensured she could keep paintings in her mind.A trained artist who once showed great promise, she gave up painting to focus on raising her four children with the artist Roy Churcher.It's a decision she maintained she never regretted – for her, raising a family was not compatible with painting.
Nasielski, Ksenia (1920–2015)
Ksenia Nasielski, c.1975Ksenia Nasielski, nationbuilder and linguist, lived in Cooma New South Wales, having grown up in Estonia and having escaped from terrible dangers in the second world war.In Europe Ksenia was born Ksenia Nomm in Leningrad (previously and later, St Petersburg) on 12 February 1920. Her mother was Russian and her father, Estonian. At the age of three months, she travelled with her parents, fleeing the Russian civil war, to Estonia. She learned Russian from her mother, Estonian from her neighbours and at school, German from her grandmother, and English at school.  Her father was a notary and magistrate; they had many friends.In June 1941 the Soviets, who had annexed Estonia, killed or deported political and intellectual leaders and many ordinary Estonians. Ksenia’s parents were deported to Siberia with the man Ksenia was meant to marry. Her father was shot; her mother survived.Ksenia would also have been deported but she was studying in the capital and so the Russians did not find her. She was warned, and found her name in the list of “Enemies of the State” in the post office. Within weeks after the deportations, the Nazis expelled the Soviets from Estonia, so anyone who managed to hide or was not found, as in Ksenia’s case, was free.  When Ksenia returned to her parent’s house, it was full of German soldiers. The gutsy young woman complained to the commanding officer who apologised, saying he thought it was unoccupied or owned by Jews and he returned it to Ksenia’s possession. She proceeded to clean and restore it from this temporary occupation. Ksenia found employment with the German administration.Later during the war years, when the Soviets proved to have the upper hand, the fear of renewed Soviet occupation led her to travel to Germany by boat and train. The boat she was meant to be on was torpedoed and sunk.  The boat she was on was shot at but it got through. The train trip was unpleasant – standing room only for a trip the equivalent of travelling from Canberra to Brisbane. From Berlin she continued by train to Leipzig, where she found the Schlohbachs, parents of her former neighbour and friend. They had lost much but shared their house with her. One morning as they were eating breakfast, the American army burst in to the house and gave them two hours to leave, so they moved into a disused factory and lived on bread from the Americans’ garbage bins, still wrapped in the original plastic bags.When the war was over Ksenia found work with the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA) in Hamburg.During that time, as part of a deal between the allies, Baltic women living in Germany were rounded up and transported to Lübeck to be handed over to the Russians. Lucky Ksenia was in hospital and had a doctor’s certificate to say she could not travel, otherwise she might have ended up in Siberia or worse.Working for the UNRRA, she helped other displaced persons. She found a job for a young Polish man, author and lawyer, named Adam Nasielski. They became friends and he visited her regularly when she was in hospital with jaundice. They married, and would have moved to France to live; Adam would have been accepted: he had served in the French army; but Ksenia was Estonian – a country which had sided with Germany, so the French would not have her.Ksenia is quoted: “Neither of us had surviving relations in our home countries so we had to start again and wanted to do so in an English-speaking country. We were considering USA, Canada and England.“But at a party we met a Mr Grey, who was recruiting people for Australian work programs. All we knew about Australia was that it was far away and had a lot of sheep. “He told us: ‘We don’t need white collar, or even blue collar workers; we are looking for people prepared to do manual labour.’ We both knew what was expected of us and did not mind.”In Australia Ksenia’s words continued: “So we came to Australia [arriving on 15 January 1949], to make a new country our home. I got work as a housekeeper for a doctor in Sydney and Adam worked for the Department of Main Roads. At the end of our two-year contract in 1951, we came to the Snowy Mountains Scheme. Adam was offered employment as a junior catering officer at a construction camp [Island Bend] on the upper Snowy River, and I worked in the office making up his orders. The air was fresh, the sky beautiful and we were surrounded by mountains. In summer we went for long walks and sometimes swam in the Snowy River. The bush with its birds, heath and alpine flowers was new and something I had never seen before.”Employed by the Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority, the couple had to live in separate barracks, but did not mind because it was a start. All around them was bustling activity – the signs of a nation growing and building.“Prefabricated houses were brought up from Cooma in 1954 and it became a little town. I no longer had to travel by jeep to Jindabyne to do the shopping.”Ksenia was good at helping newly arrived neighbours to settle in. For one lady, she made a costume which won a prize at a Cooma festival. Her efforts in welcoming employees were noticed by the authorities, and particularly her language skills. In addition to her other four languages, she had learnt Polish from Adam and was proud to say she spoke it without fault or accent. In 1955, she was transferred to Cooma, where she interviewed new arrivals and determined what type of work they should be given. She put round pegs in round holes. She was sent to meet ships with arriving migrants in Adelaide, Melbourne and Sydney, to choose employees. Her linguistic talents and welcoming attitude came to the fore. Throughout Australia people could later be found who would say, “I know Ksenia, she found me a job in the Snowy.” Ksenia once told the Commissioner, Sir William Hudson, that if he gave her two months holiday in Italy, she would come back fluent in Italian, but he couldn’t spare her for that time! She retired in 1985.She was awarded an OAM in 1989.During her time with the Snowy, Ksenia’s mother managed to get in touch with her and let her know that she was still alive, and eventually they could arrange to meet in Sweden briefly. They would have exchanged enough stories to fill books even though her mother was strictly forbidden to talk about her time in Siberia.
Fraser, Malcolm (1930–2015)
Malcolm Fraser, c.1975National Library of Australia, 12267191 No Australian politician became Prime Minister in more controversial circumstances than Malcolm Fraser, whose name will be forever associated with the dismissal of the Whitlam government, and no prime minister's accession to power has been more hotly debated ever since. Certainly, few political events convulsed the nation as that did.Yet, however shocked and outraged people were at the time, at the subsequent election, just a few weeks later, on December 13, 1975, the electorate ignored Whitlam's appeal to "maintain the rage", and confirmed Fraser in office with the largest majority in Australian history.From being opposition leader, Fraser, who has died aged 84, won his way to The Lodge by blocking Supply and creating a House of Representatives-Senate deadlock, which Governor-General Sir John Kerr broke by dismissing the Whitlam Labor government and appointing Fraser as caretaker prime minister until an election was held.But Fraser's seven years in control of the Treasury benches were dogged by turbulence, contention and a difficult and intractable economic situation. Even so, he won three elections and was the Liberal Party's longest serving prime minister after Menzies until John Howard surpassed that record.He revealed himself to be one of the Liberal Party's most progressive leaders. Yet after his defeat by Labor's rising star, Bob Hawke, at the March, 1983 election, he was disparaged and cast into the wilderness for nearly a decade. Even his own party kept its distance. When he offered himself as the Liberal Party's federal president in 1987, he withdrew when soundings indicated clearly that party preference was for businessman John Elliott. His role in the dismissal of the Whitlam Government still rankled, even among some Liberals. He again withdrew in 1993 when Tony Staley became a candidate. In some eyes, Fraser's reputation also was still smudged by his resignation as defence minister in 1971 — an act that led to the downfall of his leader and Prime Minister, John Gorton.He had precipitated that crisis by charging that Gorton had been disloyal to a senior minister (himself) and was not fit to hold office. Added to that was his move to topple Billy Snedden as opposition leader. He failed in his first attempt, but succeeded in his second bid on March 21, 1975, when he won a party-room ballot by 37 votes to 27.All these events left a mark. Perhaps more so, because he was never a popular figure, though respected for his strength and political authority. So he was politically excommunicated, dashing his hopes of fulfilling an elder statesman role in Australia. Full public rehabilitation did not come for him until the Liberal Party decided to bring him in from the cold in June 2000 and bestow the party's highest honour, life membership. Even John Howard, whom Fraser had criticised savagely a week earlier, was prepared to be magnanimous, declaring him to have been a "great Liberal leader". Howard's praise for his former leader stopped there.Even though Fraser went on to win public support for his strong anti-Howard stand on humanitarian issues and other social causes, Howard never publicly criticised Fraser. That restraint probably stemmed from the fact that when he became prime minister, Howard was concerned about the way Fraser had been treated. One of his first actions was to offer Fraser a diplomatic appointment, but it didn't suit the former prime minister's lifestyle and commitment at that time.The 1990s also saw a reconciliation between Whitlam and Fraser. In a speech paying tribute to Fraser's strong anti-Howard stand on humanitarian issues, Whitlam said: "Malcolm Fraser has now replaced me as Public Enemy Number One in the demonology of the Australian right wing. I must say I am much more relaxed about being supplanted by Malcolm Fraser for a second time than I was the first time".Fraser won respect for seeking to use his post-PM years constructively. Much of that respect emanated from his role in establishing the CARE organisation in Australia, thus enabling him to make a major impact on overseas aid, both through the Australian arm and the worldwide body, CARE International; he led both at different stages. He was also outspoken on affairs of the day, ranging from media ownership, the rights of asylum seekers and their detention, the treatment of Aborigines to the role of the High Court, to name a few.Fraser faced a tough task after winning the 1975 election with a mandate to curb the excesses of the Whitlam years, restore order to the economy, confidence to investors and sound government. To do this, he set about slashing public-sector expenditure, reducing the tax burden and initiating a drive to beat inflation. But the economic recovery he sought eluded him. It foundered on unemployment, demands for higher wages and developing globalisation. The challenge of globalisation demanded deregulation, whereas Fraser, ever the traditionalist, put his faith in regulation. He also failed to take the opportunity to reform the industrial system.Nevertheless, he chalked up significant achievements in other areas of government. He championed multiculturalism; revived Australia's flagging immigration program, accepted thousands of Vietnamese boat people as refugees and accepted by regular refugee entry more than 50,000 others; extended native land title rights and appointed three particularly sensitive Aboriginal Affairs ministers in Fred Chaney, Ian Viner and Peter Baume.In foreign relations, he strengthened Australia as a middle power able to punch well above its diplomatic weight, and for most of his years as prime minister, he was the leading figure in the Commonwealth of nations. He played a prominent part in negotiations that saw Zimbabwe become an independent nation, staring down British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in the process. However, he missed out on the Commonwealth secretary-generalship because then Prime Minister Hawke was heavy handed in pressing Fraser's nomination and because many saw it as "Africa's turn".On other fronts, where Whitlam had failed, Fraser negotiated a practical border arrangement between Australia and Papua New Guinea. He also supported environmental undertakings, reformed the family support system, established the Special Broadcasting Service (SBS), and banned whaling around the Australian coast.After his retirement Fraser admitted "the major mistake we made was not to go for full industrial power for the Commonwealth in 1976". A radical approach was needed and Fraser never took it. He also felt he made a mistake with the timing of the 1983 election by setting it in March rather than later in the year. A further error of judgement, he admitted, was his decision to quit politics immediately after the 1983 poll. If he had stayed on for a time, he believed the Liberals might not have spent a decade locked in a destructive leadership struggle between Howard and Peacock.As Prime Minister he was in the Menzies mould. His philosophy in politics was to "stay totally in control all the time". He ran cabinet meetings on the basis of "consensus by exhaustion". He had complete command over the machinery of government, was a stickler for due process, while his ability to master briefs and his cross-portfolio knowledge was said to be "awesome".Tony Eggleton, who worked closely with Fraser as director of the Liberal Party's Federal Secretariat and was a political adviser, has a vivid recollection of Fraser's determination, which could be translated into bloody-mindedness. "I still smile", he said, "when I remember Big Mal striding across the ballroom at the Savoy Hotel in London, convinced that he was taking a short cut to his suite. Despite the protestations of personal and hotel staff, Malcolm headed for a door and disappeared into the broom cupboard to an accompanying clatter of mops and buckets. Despite some loss of dignity, he managed to crack a smile".
Bandler, Ida Lessing Faith (1918–2015)
Faith Bandler, by Alexandra Asovtseff, c1962National Library of Australia, 12889217Faith Bandler changed people's hearts and minds in support of human rights and social justice. Her smile, no doubt, helped. The National Trust listed her as a national living treasure in 1997 and the Herald, in 2001, included her among the 100 most influential Australians of the 20th century. The Good Weekend, in 2011, included her in a list of 50 women considered the most influential in the world.Her greatest achievement was her 10-year campaign for Aboriginal rights leading to the 1967 referendum which changed the Constitution and included Aborigines in the census. She worked for Aboriginal education and housing, was a founding member of the Women's Electoral Lobby and the Australian Republican Movement, campaigned for the rights of South Sea Islanders and wrote six books, including Wacvie (1977), a biographical novel about her father.Her father, Wacvie Mussingkon, son of Baddick and Lessing Mussingkon, was taken as a boy in 1883 from Biap, on the island of Ambrym in what is now Vanuatu. His abduction was part of blackbirding, the practice which brought cheap labour to help establish the Australian sugar industry.Many islanders came voluntarily but Wacvie was a boy who didn't speak English and, according to family oral history, was sold as a slave in Mackay and worked on sugar plantations for about 20 years until escaping. He finally settled at Tumbulgum, northern NSW, and married Ida Venno, of Indian-Scottish descent. They had four sons and four daughters, including Ida Faith, born on September 27, 1918.Faith's father, who had become Peter Mussing, a lay preacher and worked on a banana plantation outside Murwillumbah, died when she was only five but he had taught his children to be independent. Their mother was practical and proper, making table napkins out of bleached flour bags during the 1930s depression and insisting on table cloths, even if made from newspapers, cut in fancy shapes.The family moved to Murwillumbah and, although the Tweed Heads Chamber of Commerce wanted a separate school for "coloured children", records show that Faith passed the examination for entrance to Murwillumbah High School in 1932. She may have been the only black child to do so.The Mussings survived the Depression with the help of home-grown produce. They argued politics around the dinner table, Faith's politics were already developing a radical bent. Music united them. Ida sang Handel and Strauss arias at home. Faith and the boys loved Paul Robeson and followed the civil rights struggle in the United States.The Depression cut short Faith's schooling, although she went to Cleveland Street night school in Sydney after the war. Her first job was with a dressmaker, then as a domestic help, and she learned the piano. But, when Japanese submarines attacked Sydney Harbour in 1942, she joined the Women's Land Army. Her brother Eddy died on the notorious Burma-Thailand Railway.Afterwards she became a seamstress, joined the cosmopolitan world of Kings Cross, met people of the Left, including poet Dame Mary Gilmore and writer Len Fox, and developed a long and close relationship with Karl Schultz, a Finnish seaman who jumped ship and encouraged her interest in politics. She took formal singing lessons.Endorsed as a delegate to the Australian Peace Congress in 1950, Faith came under the influence of Jessie Street, who worked to have the rights of women included in the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights and was an executive member of the World Peace Council.The two women's backgrounds could not have been different. Street's father traced his ancestry back to Alfred the Great; her husband, Sir Kenneth, was NSW Chief Justice, his father had been chief justice and her son, Sir Laurence, was to be chief justice. Yet Bandler and Street began in 1957, with Pearl Gibbs, an Aboriginal leader, and others, a campaign for a national referendum to alter the Constitution so that the Australian government had powers over Aboriginal affairs previously held by the states.Gibbs and Bandler formed the Aboriginal Australian Fellowship, with Gilmore and Street as patrons. The Federal Council for Aboriginal Advancement, later the Federal Council for the Advancement of Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders, was set up in 1958.Faith Mussing had met Hans Bandler, a design engineer, in 1950, at an Australian Peace Council musical evening, where she was a speaker and he screened documentaries about Aboriginal culture.Hans Bandler also knew about discrimination. A Jew born in Vienna, he saw the Nazis march into his country and spent time in Dachau and Buchenwald. He and Faith married in 1952, after her return from the 1951 Berlin Youth Festival in East Berlin.She had gone with other young Australians, fearing that World War III was about to begin, and wanting to prevent it. ASIO opened files on them and their passports were confiscated on their return. Bandler did not get hers back for 10 years and she lost her dressmaking job at David Jones.The 1967 referendum was a triumph for Bandler and her campaigning colleagues. "The hardest part was to get people to think of the Aboriginal people as people," she recalled of the vote that gave the first Australians the status of human beings in the census.The campaign achieved the highest "yes" vote recorded at an Australian referendum - 90.77 per cent. Discriminatory sections were cut from the constitution and the Commonwealth gained power to legislate for indigenous people.
Bevan, David Robert (1943–2015)
from Hills to Hawkesbury LivingDavid Bevan, 2004, by Nikola FitzpatrickIt is with sadness that we report the passing of prior long time Glenorie resident, David Bevan. David, the older son of Daphne & Victor Bevan, late of Cattai Ridge Road, Glenorie, lost his battle with his health on Saturday 7 February 2015 at Royal North Shore Hospital.He was born on 18 August 1943, grew up in Glenorie, a pupil of Glenorie Public School then Hornsby Boys’ High, which unfortunately burned down, requiring transfer to Normanhurst Boys’ High School. Upon completion of his schooling, he commenced a carpenter’s apprenticeship with Paul Bridson. He also worked shifts at the Glenorie telephone exchange, run by Ivan and Shirley White within the Glenorie Post Office. As a lad he was a member of the Glenorie Scouts and in later teenage years was in the first group of Glenorie Sea Scouts, organised and run by Ray Whiteman.On 29 July 1961, 20 days before his 18th birthday, a tragic accident rendered him a quadriplegic. He spent many months in Royal North Shore Hospital. The Glenorie community, including the scouting associations, rallied with amazing support, fund raising for David and his family to assist with David’s medical and rehabilitation expenses, climaxing in a dance held at the Glenorie Memorial Hall and attended by 350 people.David’s original rehabilitation exercises included using an old typewriter with two fingers of his paralysed hands and hitting the keys as hard as he could. From this simple exercise, and by gaining knowledge and ideas, the donation of an old alcohol-run carbon duplicator, and the support and assistance from many people, including his cousin Stan Bevan – and with a lot of hard work – his own business ‘Daveprint Duplicating Service’ was born.This business grew over the years, saw the introduction of a letterpress printer with which David produced cards, invitations, reports and magazines, including the Glenorie RSL magazine Yours. With progression, David became proficient with computerised equipment and eventually started the production of a local newspaper The Glenorian – Glenorie and District Gazette. He designed, organised, formatted and edited this popular local newspaper. Over the years he gathered local items, advertisements and information for this popular local newspaper, producing 100 editions. The final issue was printed in November 2010.David was well recognised in his community, having been awarded life membership of the Glenorie RSL in 2008, life membership of the Dural Rotary Club and a community award from the radio station 2WS. He was a member of the Galston Rotary Club and worked for many such community groups.David’s health started to deteriorate and circumstances saw him move to North Richmond for the last few years, with the assistance of family. He became bedridden in the latter part of 2014 and was frequently hospitalised. In January 2015, he became a permanent resident of Aminya Nursing Home, Baulkham Hills.David always felt that he wanted to repay the community who came to his aid throughout his difficult life. Well done, David!Rosemary Dorrough, 'Bevan, David Robert (1943–2015)', Obituaries Australia, National Centre of Biography, Australian National University, http://oa.anu.edu.au/obituary/bevan-david-robert-26928/text34449, accessed 9 July 2019.© Copyright Obituaries Australia, 2010-2019David Bevan, 2004, by Nikola Fitzpatrick
18 August 1943  Epping, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia

7 February 2015  St Leonards, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia pleural effusionAn initiative of the National Centre of Biography at the Australian National University© Copyright Obituaries Australia, 2010-2019Copyright · Disclaimer · Privacy Policy · Contact Us
Inder, Stuart Gerald (1926–2015)
Journalist, editor and publisher Stuart Inder was the leading expert on the Pacific Islands between the early 1950s and the mid-1980s as he covered the region's recovery from World War II and chronicled its critical transition from colonisation to independence.Commitment and passion for the people and stories of the islands shone through his work. With elegant, clear prose and keen eye for detail, he always got right to the heart of a story.Throughout his long and distinguished career he worked for news outlets including the ABC, Australian Geographic, the Bulletin and the Sydney Morning Herald. However, it was his 30-year stint for the Pacific Islands Monthly (PIM) which cemented his reputation as a much respected authority on Pacific issues.His perceptive commentary and analysis was applied to such seminal events as the raising of Nauru's first independent flag in 1972, the celebrations to mark the signing of the Treaty of Independence of Papua New Guinea in 1978 and the opening of Norfolk Island's first Legislative Assembly in 1979.In 1965, Inder wrote about the quest of the Banaban people to be fairly recompensed by the British government for the phosphate mining on Ocean Island. His words drew international interest and helped publicise the Banabans' case, which they later won.Stuart Gerald Inder was born on November 7, 1926, in Mosman, the third of seven children to Gerald Inder, a haulage contractor, and his wife, Lilian (nee Woodberry). He grew up in Manly and went to Manly Intermediate High.As a child, Stuart loved writing and showed early promise, demonstrating the flair and originality that would characterise his later career. In 1939, when he was 12, he and three of his brothers established and published the Smedley Times, a local weekly newspaper with news, sports and a serial, all for the bargain price of a penny. He was also a regular contributor to Sunbeams, the children's page in the Sunday Sun.Inder left school in 1942 and went to work as a copyboy for the Sydney Sun. He became a cadet in 1944. Later that year, he was conscripted into the AIF, where he trained as a signalman. He was about to be shipped out to New Guinea in 1945, when the war ended.He was then sent to Japan and worked with the British Commonwealth Occupation Forces on their newspaper, British Commonwealth Occupation News, and was part of a team that produced public health information films for the troops.After being demobbed in 1947, Inder returned to the Sydney Sun. In 1950, he was in Maitland, reporting on the floods, when a ruptured appendix sent him to Maitland Hospital for two months. There he met Jo Bell, a nurse from Coffs Harbour, and they were married in 1951.In 1953, the growing family moved to the then Australian Territory of Papua, where Inder became the ABC correspondent. With an irresistible sense of adventure, he thrived on the adrenaline rush of providing daily news bulletins. He later said this was one of the best times of his life.In the days before easy air travel, he hopped on cargo ships and travelled extensively throughout the Islands. He met chiefs, colonial officials and politicians and always had an ear out for the gold-coin quote and finer details that made a good story. Before long he was invited to contribute articles to Pacific Islands Monthly.PIM, first published in 1930 by New Zealand-born Robbie Robson, was the voice of the Pacific Islands for 70 years. It played an integral part in building the identity and strength of the islands as they recovered from World War II and prepared for independence. Readers with few other regional news sources could keep an eye on the shipping schedules, catch up on the region's latest political developments and read personal memoirs from old Pacific hands.It was also an important medium for advertisers to reach a captive audience, its pages thick with adverts for the essentials of a colonial life in the tropics - Electrolux kerosene-powered deep freezers, Peter's powdered milk and Arnott's crackers.The Inder family returned to Sydney in 1955. After a two-year stint at People magazine, Inder joined the staff of PIM full-time in 1957. As joint editor of PIM with Judy Tudor, later publisher for Pacific Publications, Inder's career with PIM spanned more than 30 years. Pacific Publications published, along with PIM, the daily Fiji Times (which Inder edited in Suva for three months in 1958), the Pacific Islands Year Book, and books by writers such as Robert Langdon and James Sinclair.Speaking about his time there, Inder said: "We loved it. We all believed in it and we put our everything into it".In the mid-1960s, Inder initiated the famous weekly Thursday lunches, held near PIM's office in central Sydney. These were an invaluable source of news, gossip and contacts for all who attended, including island traders such as Peter Fisher and Henry Cumines, planters, kiaps (Pidgin for district and patrol officers) and journalists. The lunches continue to this day at the Law Society restaurant in Philip Street.With an enviable contact book and a huge amount of knowledge, Inder was trusted and respected throughout the region for his balanced reporting and thoughtful editorials. He was in demand as a world authority on Pacific affairs, often providing expert commentary for the ABC's PM and Notes on the News.He had strong professional working relationships with political and business leaders throughout the islands including Michael Somare (PNG), Hammer de Robert (Nauru), Sir Tom Davis (Cook Islands), David Lange (New Zealand) and Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara (Fiji).
Stanton, Richard Roger (1965–2015)
from ForesterRichard Stanton, n.d.Our colleague and friend Richard Stanton has died tragically as a result of a fall from a bicycle early Thursday morning, 29 January, aged only 49.Having grown up in Armidale, northern New South Wales, Richard came to Canberra in 1985 to study forestry at ANU. He arrived known as Roger, because previously he went by his second name to avoid confusion with his father, who is also Richard.Living on the ANU campus at Bruce Hall, Roger was noted for dressing a little more sharply than the other forestry students. Whether that reflected more on their shabby standards than on him, it earned him the nick-name ‘Mr Immaculate’. In contrast, when he changed from using the name Roger back to his first name the sceptics dubbed him ‘Dodgy’!In the words of one of his forestry school lecturers, Richard was ‘an exemplary student, intelligent, resourceful, always courteous and well behaved, and well liked and respected by all’. Despite this high praise, his fellow students report that he indulged in the usual undergraduate frivolities, but always knew where to draw the line and was always careful enough to not be caught. They also report that his intellectual capacity, writing and speaking skills, and reliability were much in demand by other students in the group work often required in a forestry course.After a few years working in eucalypt plantation research, the above attributes led Richard to a career in policy and management, notably as Executive Assistant to the Managing Director of State Forests of New South Wales and later in senior roles and as CEO of forestry and forest products industry organisations including: the National Association of Forest Industries; Plantation Timber Association of Australia (PTAA); Australian Paper Industry Council (APIC); and the Australian Plantation Products and Paper Industry Council (A3P).In these various roles Richard worked on: the regulation of timber preservatives and registration of chemicals used in forestry; promotion of plantation expansion through the government/industry strategy ‘Plantations for Australia – the 2020 Vision’; quarantine and plant health issues; greenhouse and renewable energy; taxation; infrastructure; and genetic modification. His work in these areas showed Richard was a great communicator, facilitator, listener and negotiator. His incisive intellect, and his ability to think and communicate clearly and strategically, were ideal attributes for this role.Richard continued much of this work in A3P upon the merger of PTAA and APIC, as Senior Policy Manager. The new role had more of an advocacy flavour and was expanded to include, among other things; climate change and emissions trading; forest management certification; water allocation and management; bio-security; taxation; and investment. The carbon tax, Murray Darling Basin water resources, and parliamentary inquiries into the forest industry were major issues at that time. On the resignation of A3P’s first CEO Richard took over the reins and proved yet again, as would be expected, a highly regarded and capable manager. He had an excellent knowledge of the industry and the critical issues affecting its success, leading by example and consolidating the reputation of the association and the industry in the eyes of both government and the community.Having successfully facilitated the merger of A3P and NAFI into the new AFPA, he was headhunted for the role of CEO and National Secretary for the Australian Forestry Standard, and was therefore responsible for managing the certification scheme that promotes responsible management of Australia’s native and plantation forests and use of wood products from sustainably managed forests. He was responsible for establishing AFS on a secure footing with strong sector support, and successfully steered through the challenging processes of accreditation, standards review and international endorsement of the Australian Forestry Standard and its recent adoption as New Zealand’s National Forestry Standard.As part of Richard’s role with the Australian Forestry Standard he was an active participant in PEFC International, an organisation devoted to facilitating the sustainable management of forests globally. Richard contributed to many meetings and policy discussions and achieved a high level of respect and affection around the world. The high esteem in which he was held is shown by condolences from PEFC colleagues in Europe, Africa, Asia, North America and the Pacific.A natural athlete, Richard competed in triathlons and is one of only 15 people to have completed 23 consecutive Sydney Half Marathons and was training for the next one later in 2015. He also loved cycling, riding around Canberra with a group each week and going further afield whenever he could get away.Richard was a man with strong principles and a generous nature. He was devoted to his wife and family, and fully involved in family affairs, including his girls’ school and sporting activities. As in his professional life he was known for his willingness to roll up his sleeves when help was needed, without fuss. It was therefore not surprising to learn Richard had volunteered as an organ donor, a decision he had fully discussed with his family, and was supported by them. As a result Richard’s untimely death provided hope for a number of people who benefitted from this generous decision.Richard is survived by his wife Sonia, daughters Emma and Julia, and father Richard.Sonia Stanton, Mark Parsons, Miles Prosser, Hans Drielsma and Peter Juniper, 'Stanton, Richard Roger (1965–2015)', Obituaries Australia, National Centre of Biography, Australian National University, http://oa.anu.edu.au/obituary/stanton-richard-roger-19567/text30909, accessed 9 July 2019.© Copyright Obituaries Australia, 2010-2019Richard Stanton, n.d.
20 October 1965  Armidale, New South Wales, Australia

29 January 2015  Garran, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, Australia 
Gilbert, Lionel Arthur (1924–2015)
Well known Armidale author, historian and naturalist Lionel Gilbert OAM has died, aged 91.Dr Gilbert wrote many books, including The Last Word: Two Centuries of Australian Epitaphs (2005) and History Around Us (1974).He died on January 28.His contribution as a writer earned him great respect and genuine affection from the city he grew to love and to serve for more than 50 years.Born in Burwood in 1924, he attended Burwood Primary School, then Homebush Intermediate High School and later Fort Street Boys’ High School, before moving on to Sydney Teachers’ College in 1942.World War II interrupted his teacher training, and he enlisted in the RAAF as a radio operator in 1943, serving in Arnhem Land – only 300 kilometres from the Japanese forces.He had a passion for field botany and Australian and local history, which was evident in his study and later writing.While teaching in Nabiac he met Margaret Roberts and the couple were married in 1949.Their daughter Anne was born in 1960. In 1955 Lionel enrolled as the University of New England’s first group of external students, and the family moved to Armidale in 1960 so he could finish his honours degree.Joining the then Armidale Teachers’ College as lecturer in history in 1963, he was soon promoted to head of the history department and, late in his career, to acting deputy principal.In a time of great change in tertiary education he instigated the introduction of ground-breaking courses in local and applied history, which met the growing needs of students.His driving research interests led to an impressive and influential body of publications, and his meticulous preparation, writing and stimulating presentation, tinged with an obvious respect for “other days, other ways”, saw him generously accept a punishing round of speaking engagements.During that time he was able to maintain his involvement in the Armidale Historical Society, advisory committees for the Armidale Dumaresq Council, and state archive bodies.Dr Gilbert had a role in establishing the Port Macquarie Museum, the Armidale Folk Museum, the Hillgrove Museum and the Museum of Education at Armidale.He was awarded a Churchill Fellowship in 1972, the Order of Australia Medal in 1995, a Centenary Medal in 2001, the Freedom of the City of Armidale by the Armidale Dumaresq Council in 2001 and an honorary degree of doctor of letters from UNE in 2008.Dr Gilbert is survived by his wife Margaret, daughter Anne, son-in-law Tony and grandson Alexei.John Harris, 'Gilbert, Lionel Arthur (1924–2015)', Obituaries Australia, National Centre of Biography, Australian National University, http://oa.anu.edu.au/obituary/gilbert-lionel-arthur-19129/text30705, accessed 9 July 2019.© Copyright Obituaries Australia, 2010-2019
8 December 1924  Burwood, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia

Uren, Thomas (Tom) (1921–2015)
Tom Uren, c.1970State Library of Victoria, 49346892 Tom Uren left school at 13, became a boxer, was fighting World War II in Timor on his 21st birthday, spent his next three birthdays as a prisoner of the Japanese, including on the infamous Burma-Thailand railway, and saw the sky change colour over Nagasaki after the atom bomb was dropped.He became a minister in the Whitlam and Hawke governments, deputy leader of the federal Labor Party, and was largely responsible for the creation of the National Estate, protecting large areas of Glebe and Woolloomooloo from developers, and decentralisation to Albury Wodonga. Believing that one of the greatest advances of the 20th century was the new understanding of humankind's impact on the environment, he campaigned long after leaving Canberra for saving wilderness areas and the Sydney Harbour foreshores.For an old boxer and prisoner-of-war, he spoke frequently of love, sometimes quoting Paulo Freire: "Dialogue cannot exist in the absence of a profound love for the world and for men." Freire was a Brazilian Marxist Catholic whose writings were a tonic to Uren's soul, although Uren was never a Marxist. He drew his social values from life and living, rather than from books.Tom Uren, who has died at 93, was born in Balmain on May 28, 1921 to Tom Uren and his wife, formerly Agnes Miller. He carried Cornish and Celtic blood from his father's family, and Jewish and English from his paternal grandmother. After the family moved to Harbord when he was five, Tom walked barefooted to the local primary school, before being made to wear shoes to Manly Intermediate High.He left school during the Depression, because his father, a former jockey and jack-of-all trades, was out of work. Young Tom helped classify rabbit and kangaroo skins, sold newspapers and caddied on golf courses. He gave all his earnings to his mother, a former barmaid, not just because they were poor but, he said later, because he wanted to marry her.He became a surf lifesaver, rugby league forward and learnt to box at Jack Dunleavy's gymnasium, perhaps driven by the fact that one of his father's cousins, Tommy Uren, was a notable boxer. He had applied to join the army in May 1939 and was accepted soon after World War II broke out in September, but took leave to fight for the Australian heavyweight title in 1940, aged 19. He had been suffering from the flu and, although he knocked Billy Britt down in the sixth round, was beaten in the seventh.Uren went to Darwin, then to Timor in December 1941 with the 2/1 Heavy Battery. He had heard the stories of Australian courage at Gallipoli and in France in World War I, but what he saw in Timor was confusion.As the Australian force was being over-run in February 1942, Uren volunteered to go forward in a vehicle armed with a single Bren gun to support a Tasmanian battalion, the 2/40th, which was making what has been described as the last bayonet charge in Australian military history. Witnessing the Australian advance up Oesaoe ridge under machine-gun fire marked the 20-year-old for life.Forced to surrender, the prisoners were taken early in 1943 to Singapore, from where Uren was loaded into a railway goods truck which ended up at Konyu River camp, where the surgeon Lieutenant Colonel Edward "Weary" Dunlop was commanding officer of the men slaving to build the Burma-Thailand railway for the Japanese. Uren moved later to the Hintok camps.One man is said to have died for every sleeper laid on the railway. Uren prayed every day, frightened that cholera would take him, as it had so many others. Yet he rejoiced in the Australian egalitarianism. He believed that the British officers cared above all for themselves, while Dunlop and other officers funded what passed for a hospital.Uren was transported in 1944 to work in a copper smelting plant at Saganoseki, Japan, then at lead smelting works at Omuta. Finding his Japanese fellow workers comradely, he realised then that it wasn't the Japanese he hated, but militarism. He later quoted Martin Luther King: "Hate distorts the personality and scars the soul. It is more injurious to the hater than the hated." He never forgot the colour of the sky over Nagasaki after the atom bomb was dropped: "We didn't hear any noise, just witnessed that vivid crimson sky."Afterwards he worked at the Port Kembla steelworks and met Patricia Palmer; her brother had shown him her photograph when they were prisoners. They married in 1947 and honeymooned at the Hotel Carrington, Katoomba.She gave him a copy of the J.B. Phillips version of the Bible. The Bible stories moved him and it wasn't until much later that he realised that his prayers were for himself and not others. Uren was 45 before he became an atheist.He later preferred the term "non-believer", largely in deference to the Sisters of St Joseph, the Catholic order who admired his humanity and called him an honorary Josephite.Uren continued to box and went to England, with mixed success; his wartime malaria had left effects. He came home, worked as a labourer, then as a trainee executive at Woolworths. He decided to join the Labor Party in 1951 on the way from Lithgow, where he managed the Woolworths store, to Bathurst for the funeral of Ben Chifley, the former Labor Prime Minister.His political views were founded on his mother's sense of social justice, Weary Dunlop's example of leadership and F.D. Roosevelt's New Deal. He was to add Mahatma Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Ho Chi Minh and Nelson Mandela to his list of influences.Living in Guildford, he won the western Sydney seat of Reid in 1958. When he retired from Parliament in 1990, he had been father of the House for eight years.
Whitlam, Edward Gough (1916–2014)
from Sydney Morning HeraldGough Whitlam, c.1972National Library of Australia, 12265747 "With all my reservations," Gough Whitlam said on his 80th birthday, "I do admit I seem eternal." He warned, however: "Dying will happen sometime. As you know, I plan for the ages, not just for this life." Whitlam defied these intimations of mortality for another 18 years before dying happened. What were his plans for the next age, his afterlife? "You can be sure of one thing," he said of a possible meeting with his maker, "I shall treat Him as an equal."Those who admired and respected the former prime minister loved the jokes. Those who disliked him were not amused, even if they realised that the self-mockery kept the hubris in check. People liked Whitlam or disliked him. It was impossible to feel indifference. Yet even his enemies respected his intellect, powers of advocacy and larger-than-life presence. Gough Whitlam stands behind David Smith, the secretary to the Governor-General, as he reads the proclamation dissolving parliament following the dismissal of the Whitlam government.Bitter opponents warmed somewhat after he left parliament. They had borne grudges. After 23 years of non-Labor government, they were reluctant to concede that the government he led in 1972 had a right to govern. Their tactics of obstruction led him to call an election after 18 months, which he won. They tried again 18 months later, this time with the help of Sir John Kerr, the governor-general, and shambolic behaviour by some government ministers. The propriety of their actions remains open for debate, but Kerr dismissed Whitlam in 1975 and Labor lost the ensuing election overwhelmingly.The manner of his defeat has confused the Whitlam legacy. He is remembered as much for his going, which made him a martyr for many Australians, as for his achievements and the new sense of identity he brought the nation.Senator John Faulkner asked in 2002: "Are you comfortable being an icon and elder statesman?". Whitlam replied: "Well, I hope this is not just because I was a martyr. The fact is I was an achiever." He could point to achievements and reforms such as recognising China, abolishing conscription, establishing Medibank, introducing needs-based school funding, extending tertiary education, reforming family law, boosting the arts, indexing pensions, and moving to equal pay for women, voting at 18, one vote-one value and Aboriginal land rights. He removed sales tax on contraceptives. He broke the cultural cringe, introduced an Australian honours system and a new national anthem, made relations with Asia a priority and ended Australia's involvement with imperialism, later revived in Iraq.Edward Gough Whitlam was born on July 11, 1916, in Kew, Melbourne, when Australia's first prime minister, Edmund Barton, still lived. He lived during the lifetimes of all 27 other Australian prime ministers, to Tony Abbott. He contributed to the national debate from 1944, when he campaigned for a referendum seeking federal powers for post-war reconstruction – it lost – and still went to his office four days a week in his 99th year.Henry Whitlam, an English draper, had gone to Bombay in 1854 to join the British army, under Field Marshal Hugh Gough. He carried 54 books with him. Later he joined the miners' struggle for voting rights on Victorian goldfields. Henry and Adelaide Whitlam named their first son Henry Gough. Called Harry, he served four years in Pentridge jail for forgery. A son, Harry Frederick, called Fred, became Australia's Crown Solicitor. It's a tribute to Australian democracy that the family could move in a generation from criminality to a senior law office in the new nation and, in the next, to the prime ministership.Fred married Martha Maddocks and moved to Canberra, the new capital, in 1927, when he was deputy crown solicitor under Sir Robert Garran. The family was described as upper middle class. Some would argue that opponents saw Gough as a class traitor.Young Whitlam attended Knox Grammar, Telopea Park High in Canberra, then Canberra Grammar. As children, books were Gough and his younger sister Freda's world. Frivolous distractions, even radio, were eschewed. Having topped the 1934 year in Christian doctrine at Grammar, ahead of Francis James, who was to edit The Anglican, Whitlam and James were told by Canon Edwards, the principal, why Francis would receive the prize: "The reason is that James believes it and you, Whitlam, do not."Whitlam believed that his "maker" were the forces of family, society and history. He described himself as "a fellow traveller with Christianity" or "post-Christian". He knew more about religious belief than most believers. His life demonstrated the importance of ideas and belief.He read Latin, Greek, English, history and some psychology for his Sydney University Arts degree, won a rowing blue, reorganised the St Paul's College library, edited Hermes, the students' magazine, played Noel Coward and Neville Chamberlain in university reviews and appeared briefly in Broken Melody, a minor film. He enlisted in the RAAF in 1941, flying as a navigator from northern Australia.In 1942 he married Margaret Dovey, who had swum breaststroke for Australia at the 1938 Empire Games, the daughter of Bill, later Justice, Dovey. Their marriage is the longest prime ministerial union. He said in 2002: "My 25 years as member for Werriwa and three years as prime minister were just flashes compared in the long, warm glow of the other significant anniversary I celebrated this year – 60 years together with Margaret Elaine Dovey." Margaret helped keep Gough's feet near the ground. She said: "I'm a bit tired of all the adulation. He's almost reached the beatification stage. I suppose canonisation will come, with the obituaries."Whitlam joined the Labor Party in 1945, completed legal studies, joined the bar in 1947 and used a war service loan to build a house at Cronulla. He stood in 1948 for Sutherland shire council and failed, stood in the 1950 NSW election, and failed, before winning the outer western suburbs federal seat of Werriwa in a 1952 by-election. His family recognised in the post-World War II electorate the disadvantages in education, health, transport, housing and other urban facilities. He tried to correct the deficiencies. Neville Wran, former NSW premier, said: "It was said of Caesar Augustus that he found a Rome of brick and left it of marble. It can be said of Gough Whitlam that he found Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane unsewered, and left them fully flushed."Labor colleagues in Canberra saw the new, exceptionally tall member as an oddity – avoiding bars and absorbed in work. Robert Menzies saw Whitlam's potential: "He will lead the [Labor] party one day. It will not be dull."Whitlam saw government as an instrument to improve life for all Australians. Graham Freudenberg wrote in A Certain Grandeur: "He took certain propositions as self-evident and among these were: that the national parliament was the only really important parliament in Australia; that the role of government was constructive, positive and benevolent; that action by governments, through parliament and the public service, was the normal and natural approach for the solution of Australian problems ...".His interests ranged from flushing the suburbs to recognising "Red China". A speech in 1954 urged the latter. An internationalist and nationalist, he said in 1963: "Australia must strive above all things and more than most nations for the Parliament of the Man, the Federation of the World. The ultimate security of our nation and the ultimate survival of civilisation alike demand it." The weakening of United Nations authority, after the United States became the one superpower, disappointed Whitlam, who thought that history's lessons were not being learned. He pointed to Italy and Germany's arming Franco in Spain while the United States stayed out of the League of Nations; to the Americans helping the Taliban to remove the Russians from Afghanistan and arming Saddam Hussein's Iraq against fundamentalist Muslim Iran.
Youdale, Geoffrey Paul (Geoff) (1946–2014)
from Sydney Morning HeraldGeoff Youdale, n.d.As you drive along the streets of Sydney, you can thank Geoff Youdale and his fellow civil engineers for your smooth ride. From the mid-1970s, Youdale specialised in pavement structures (that is, the road surface).Through the 1980s, he contributed to the development of pavement structural design, to the laboratory testing of pavement materials, and to full-scale wheel-load testing of real pavement structures. He was also a leader in introducing a new manual of road pavement thickness design throughout Australia.In the 1990s, Youdale managed the development of road technology, directing innovations in Australia and contributing internationally through committees such as the United States Strategic Highway Research Program, the World Roads Association (based in Paris) and the Global Road Knowledge Exchange Network. This helped to accelerate the move to the computerised pavement design methods now used throughout Australia.In 1996 Youdale was awarded the Australian Road Federation's John Shaw Medal in recognition of his contribution to road technology. In 1999, he was awarded the AusIndustry Innovation Award as part of the National Engineering Excellence Awards as a member of the RTA/CSIRO team that developed the "RoadCrack" high speed measuring vehicle. After his retirement from the RTA in 1995, he continued to contribute to the industry as a consultant, and to the establishment of and teaching at the Centre for Pavement Engineering Education.Geoffrey Paul Youdale was born in Sydney on December 24, 1946, a sixth generation descendant of the First Fleeters. He grew up in the Cammeray area and attended North Sydney Boys' High School. He graduated from the University of Sydney as a civil engineer in 1968 after being a cadet in the Department of Main Roads (later the Roads and Traffic Authority), where he worked for another 27 years.In 1970 Youdale married Margaret Smart, an arts student he had met at university. In 1973, he took a Master of Engineering Science in Engineering Construction from the University of NSW.Increasing kidney disease caused Youdale to retire before he was 50, but nearly three years later he received a transplant and decided to contribute to the wellbeing of his fellow patients. He became an active member of the renal community and a strong patient advocate. He served as vice-president of the Polycystic Kidney Disease Association for 10 years and as president of the NSW branch of the Australian Kidney Foundation for four years.From 2004, Youdale was a consumer representative of the NSW Renal Services Network of the Greater Metropolitan Clinical Taskforce, where he was chairman of a transport advisory sub-group looking at transport for dialysis patients in NSW.In addition to committee work, Youdale frequently worked in peer support activities of Kidney Health Australia and spoke at patient education forums. In 2008, Kidney Health Australia presented him with a Kidney Angel Award.Another long-time beneficiary of Youdale's expertise was the Asquith Golf Club, which in 2005 made him an honorary life member for outstanding voluntary contribution. Apart from his general administrative efficiency, he made a major contribution to the club in the 1980s when the golf course was severely disrupted by construction of the Sydney-Newcastle Freeway (now the M1). This cut through a large section of the course, requiring the construction of six new holes, the redesign of other holes, and the construction of a dam. Youdale managed the entire project.Despite his illness, he was on site no later than 6am every day and again after work at the DMR. The work involved negotiations with eight Government departments, instrumentalities and councils. He also negotiated contracts with outside contractors, all to the benefit of the club.Youdale was the author or co-author of 60 technical publications. He was twice awarded the Australian Road Research Board Directors' Prize (in 1992 and 1994), for work which best translated research into practice. He was a co-author of the Austroads Guide to the Structural Design of Road Pavements (1987 and 1992), which has been widely adopted across Australasia. In 2011, Youdale was made a Member of the Order of Australia.Geoff Youdale is survived by Margaret, children Katrina and Derek and grandchildren Zoe and Toby.Gavin Donald, 'Youdale, Geoffrey Paul (Geoff) (1946–2014)', Obituaries Australia, National Centre of Biography, Australian National University, http://oa.anu.edu.au/obituary/youdale-geoffrey-paul-geoff-18826/text30478, accessed 9 July 2019.© Copyright Obituaries Australia, 2010-2019Geoff Youdale, n.d.
24 December 1946  Sydney, New South Wales, Australia

Herbert, Dorothy Helena (1922–2014)
Dorothy Herbert, n.d.from Medical Journal of Australia, vol 202, no 7, 2015, p 391Dorothy Herbert's medical and aviation career is now a silhouette in the collective memory of the Australian pioneer spirit. She was a local hero for the Charleville community in South West Queensland. Within her family, she was both a role model and someone who took an active interest in the studies and careers of the emerging generations.Dorothy was born on 24 September 1922 and attended Ascot State School and then Somerville House in Brisbane. After finishing school in 1939, she commenced a science degree at the University of Queensland.In 1942, she joined the Women's Auxiliary Air Force as a wireless operator based at General Douglas MacArthur's headquarters in Brisbane. At the end of World War II, she returned to complete her degree, majoring in physiology and zoology. In 1947, she gained her private pilot's licence flying a Tiger Moth and, in 1950, she became a foundation member of the Australian Women Pilots' Association (AWPA).In 1948, Dorothy worked as a biochemist at the Peel Island leprosarium. She then moved to Tasmania in 1949 and worked as a biochemist at Royal Hobart Hospital.After a year in the United Kingdom, she returned to Brisbane to study medicine at the University of Queensland. After graduating in 1958, she spent 2 years as a resident medical officer at Brisbane General Hospital.In 1961, she moved to Charleville to work as a locum for the Royal Flying Doctor Service (RFDS) for 3 months. She remained in Charleville in private practice until 1981.In 1963, Dorothy bought her first aircraft — a 1957 single-engine Cessna, which she used to fly to emergencies of her own patients, medical conferences and remote properties. She was a member of a flying surgeon team and would stand in for the flying doctor as required. At a time when there were few women doctors and fewer women pilots, Dorothy made quite an impression flying to remote communities with her three corgis in tow.In 1977, she cared for a premature baby who was successfully transferred from Charleville to the Mater Mothers' Hospital in Brisbane via a pressurised government jet. This was one of the first times a premature baby had been retrieved back to a Brisbane hospital and survived.In 1978, she was crushed under a glider in a freak weather accident, suffering a fractured spine and chest injuries. She was in a coma for 3 weeks, in intensive care for 5 weeks and returned to practice in a back brace after 5 months of sick leave.In 1981, Dorothy left Charleville and semiretired to the Sunshine Coast (with her Major Mitchell cockatoo, Linda). She continued to work in general practice, specialising in acupuncture and aviation medicine. She fully retired in 1996, when she also flew her final flight. Her flying record at this time totalled 2200 hours.She was awarded the Nancy Bird Walton Trophy for services to aviation in Australasia in 1972. In 1997, she was made an honorary life member of the Aviation Medicine Society of Australia and New Zealand for her contribution as a designated examiner for 35 years. She was made a Member of the Order of Australia in 1999 for her service to rural medicine through the RFDS and to aviation through the AWPA. She also received a Centenary Medal in 2001 for her distinguished service to the RFDS.Dorothy died on 27 August 2014. Throughout her life, she was an inspiration to her family, many friends, medical colleagues and fellow pilots. We remember Dorothy as a pioneer and innovator with a wonderful sense of adventure, and as a good listener who was both perceptive and decisive.view family treeAnthony Herbert, Paul J. Mercer and Ronald W. Herbert, 'Herbert, Dorothy Helena (1922–2014)', Obituaries Australia, National Centre of Biography, Australian National University, http://oa.anu.edu.au/obituary/herbert-dorothy-helena-22439/text32168, accessed 9 July 2019.© Copyright Obituaries Australia, 2010-2019Dorothy Herbert, n.d.from Medical Journal of Australia, vol 202, no 7, 2015, p 391
Lewty, Mark (1957–2014)
Mark Lewty, by John Huth, 2003Mark was born in 1957 in Inglewood, Queensland. He attended school there before completing high school in ‘the big smoke’ of Toowoomba. There he obtained a highly sought after and contested State Cadetship with the Queensland Forestry Department. He undertook first year Science at the University of Queensland in 1975 before moving to Canberra’s ANU to study forestry and was one of the top three students each year.Kevin “Kev” Harding got to know Mark well at Garran Hall in 1977 and 1978. “Lewts was renowned for having a fridge full of offal (beef heart particularly) which he was fond of cooking up, much to the disgust of a couple of hippie-vegetarians who shared a nearby cooking space!” He was generous with his time and Kev and many other students benefited from help with some of the more difficult subjects such as mensuration.While a keen student, Mark also knew how to enjoy himself. As the Forestry Log notes he was “the little green gnome from Inglewood”. This was in reference to a G-themed party he attended at Rod Meynink’s place in Downer. As Val Chambers recalls, “Mark turned up in a quilted green jump suit (something which would now be called a ‘onesie’) with green shoes and green socks carrying a case of beer”. He stayed in character the whole night and won one of the highly sought after awards for the best outfit—several copies of out-of-date Womens’ Weeklys. As Mark said at the time, “I am very happy to receive such a fabulous prize—thank you everybody”. The party was attended by many who would finish ‘Forestry’ as the class of ’78—but if you think you remember the G-party, you probably were not there.Mark did a concurrent honours degree working with the late Professor Eric Bachelard on a tree physiology project. Even with the additional work load, he had the time and patience to help others. Mark was highly regarded by Eric and all the senior academic staff in the Forestry Department and this high regard was mutual.Being a scholarship holder Mark was guaranteed a position in the Queensland Forestry Department. He started in Monto where he worked in general forestry management. More importantly, it was here he met Robyn.In 1981 he transferred to the Forest Research Centre at Gympie where he commenced his interest in silvicultural research, specializing in weed control. Mark was always keen on expanding his knowledge, and he won support to undertake a PhD program at the University of Queensland. He was the second of the class of ‘78 to undertake such studies. He achieved his PhD with innovative work on the physiology of pine seedlings titled “Response to soil flooding of two Pinus species and their hybrid”. This was a busy period for Mark as, in 1986, he was awarded the Max Jacobs Award for travel and work associated with his PhD subject.He continued in physiology when he returned to Gympie in early 1989 as leader of Silviculture Research (plantation establishment and nurseries). Mark and John Huth particularly enjoyed the early morning pre-dawn ‘patrols’ as they called them, collecting critical tree physiology data on exotic pine seedlings. As John recalls, “Mark loved to start the day with a dose of The Courier Mail, which we both enjoyed over an early morning fire cooking damper and a cuppa.” Turning to his diary, John noted, “some memorable pre-dawn Toolara trips commencing at 3:30 am and finishing at 5:00 pm, with the usual Courier Mail/damper bush-breakfasts to add to the interest.” In these studies, Mark used a number of new physiological assessment techniques and tools including relative water content, pressure bomb and the osmometer.Mark was meticulous and methodical in everything he did. This was a feature of the detailed tree physiology assessments undertaken to measure water use in effluent re-use eucalypt plantations at Hervey Bay. Mark was an early user of canopy-shadow as an index of leaf area and the use of sap-flow meters to measure water use. As a result of Mark’s work here, and that of others, in 1992 the Queensland Forest Service received a Banksia Award for Pollution Control Technology.Robyn and Mark enjoyed the social side of forestry as ever-reliable hosts at Gympie for a BBQ and inevitable beers—another of Mark’s pleasures. This was more often than not with Mark in one of his favourite Hawaiian shirts, an apron, a stubbie-in-cooler and a serious BBQ tong beating a rhythm to whatever discussion he was enjoying at the time. It’s here that colleagues, staff and friends became one with the simple goal of enjoying each other’s company and discussing the issues of the time.Mark was adaptable, with work stints in Indonesia and Vietnam. Many will know the Indonesian pulp sector is not a place for those seeking ‘an easier life’. However, this is where Mark headed in 1994.David Boden was one who knew what Indonesia could be like for expat-foresters. He interviewed Mark in Canberra and explained the difficulties of working for companies like APRIL in Sumatra. Mark and Robyn travelled to North Sumatra to meet the people and see for themselves the environment in which they would be working. As fate would have it there were serious floods in the week prior to their visit and a key bridge was washed away on the road to the mill site in North Sumatra. David arranged for a vehicle from the mill to meet them on the other side of the washed away bridge. After ‘surviving’ a harrowing road trip from Medan, they walked across the gorge using a narrow temporary ‘Indo-style’ walk-way and found to their surprise a waiting-vehicle—this was well before mobile phones made such arrangement ‘easy’—nothing was easy in Sumatra at that time. Robyn and Mark clearly enjoyed the trip which continued to the mill and plantations surrounding the dramatic scenery of Lake Toba. After the interviews and getting to know the place, the trip was reversed and David fully expected Mark and Robyn to conclude that this sort of life style was not for them and their family of four young children. Four months later, six Lewtys returned initially to Lake Toba and then to Riau Andalan Pulp and Paper (RAPP) mill in Kerinci in Riau Province. As Research Manager, he headed R&D for a very large acacia plantation project that needed to ‘feed’ a pulpmill using over 20 000 tonnes of wood—that’s per day.Life in a company promoting competition between expat-groups was never going to be easy. However, Mark could be relied on for an honest appraisal of a forestry issue and a sound appreciation of both management and R&D, regardless of the consequences. He made significant contributions to the emerging company with a combination of academic research excellence combined with down to earth hard work and an amiable engagement with his colleagues and staff. In his own way, Mark also made significant contributions to science, as many of the issues he and the company faced in Indonesia had not been previously addressed in plantation forestry anywhere. Not surprisingly, his abilities were widely recognised in Indonesia.Russell Haines worked periodically with Mark during this period. As Russell said, “I was impressed by the speed with which Mark came to grips with the significant problems faced by RAPP in establishing acacia plantations that would meet productivity targets, and by Mark’s dedication to helping them to achieve these targets.” Visitors were treasured and Mark treated his guests to fine food. As Russell attested, “A particular specialty was BBQ’d giant river prawns …” I suspect washed down with a good measure of fine Indonesian beer.Rod Meynink, also from the class of ‘78, met Mark at the end of his tenure (or more correctly end of his tether) in Kerinci. As Rod recalls, “He had just come too close to a bullet fired by a pistol-packing pulpmill manager who liked Mark to accompany him on ‘hunting’ trips through the plantations.” Enough was enough.On his return from Indonesia in 1997, Mark was recruited once again by the Queensland Forestry Research Institute (QFRI) at Gympie. As the Leader of the Silviculture Program, he made a large contribution as he was a skilled and highly adaptable research leader. When funding became available for a hardwoods’ research program, Mark enthusiastically took on the leadership of the program. This involved a large team of researchers, covering genetics, silviculture, soils and sustainability, entomology, pathology, wood science and timber processing. His leadership of this diverse research program was exemplary. He made an excellent contribution both to operational forestry and to scientific knowledge during this period. The practical implications of his work were always a major focus.In 2002 the QFRI team lead by Mark received two highly commended awards in the 2002 Premier’s Awards for Excellence in Public Sector Management.
Thorn, William Darbyshire (Bill) (1932–2014)
Bill Thorn’s thirty-two year career at the National Library of Australia encompassed the first great wave of change that flowed on from the introduction of computers to librarianship. While others were to be the pioneers of automation, he focussed on the need for his profession to maintain its traditional skills in bibliography and reference work. He lived through massive organisational change as well, and was for many staff at the library a generous, patient mentor and good counsel in sometimes difficult and ambiguous times. Provocatively, and quoting T. S. Eliot, he once asked ‘Where is the wisdom we have lost in knowledge? / Where is the knowledge we have lost in information?’ (The Rock, 1934), and in part his career could be seen as advocacy for wisdom in making the National Library’s choices. And although his steadfast conviction that ‘the printed word contained in books and periodicals is still the fundamental reason for the existence of libraries’, as he put it on retiring in 1987, may seem to many old-fashioned today, it resonated throughout his life. ‘I became a librarian because I was interested in books,’ he said on that occasion. ‘Thirty two years working in the National Library has not extinguished that interest but broadened it and deepened it.’William Darbyshire Thorn was born in Richmond, Victoria on 7 August 1932, and grew up there. His family valued education: his mother qualified as a doctor at a time when women in that profession were still a rarity, and his father was an engineer. He and his two brothers attended Camberwell Grammar School. He first studied civil engineering at Melbourne University, at his father’s wish, but switched to a commerce degree with the intention of becoming a librarian and began his training at the Library School of the Public Library of Victoria during his second year at university.  In 1955 he graduated B. Com. and was appointed to the Commonwealth National Library as a trainee librarian. His continued training there was the usual mixture of on-the-job and formal learning of those days, and he qualified as a librarian in 1958. He began in cataloguing, as do most new librarians, then spent two years in acquisitions. In 1960 he became Chief Bibliographical Officer and Secretary of the Australian Advisory Council on Bibliographical Services (AACOBS), then the major national forum for libraries in Australia, and held that post until 1963.This was the beginning of a time of extended organisational change, as the Parliamentary Library, based at what is now Old Parliament House and for many years encompassing a role as National Library as well as the library of the Parliament, became separate National and Parliamentary libraries under the National Library Act (1960). Thorn moved between them: three years in the Legislative Research Service of the Parliamentary Library, during which time he established its Statistical Service, was followed by three years as the National Library’s Chief Liaison Librarian at Australia House in London (1966-69). At this time the Library maintained an office in London, responsible for liaison with British libraries and acquisitions work at a time when much important collection material was being purchased abroad. He returned to Canberra quite soon after the new National Library building had opened in 1968, filling a series of middle management positions in user services and reference areas, including working as an advisor to the High Court on planning library services in the new High Court building.He was then appointed to senior management as Director of the Australian National Social Sciences Library in 1975. This was one element in a fairly short-lived division of the National Library into subject specialist areas. Following this, in 1980 he was appointed as Assistant Director-General in charge of Reference Services, and served in that role until his position was abolished in a restructure in 1986.  He retired in 1987. Many at the library mourned his departure, knowing his qualities as a generous and supportive colleague and manager. For his part, Bill said to some he was grateful that he could spend more time with his wife Barbara, who was increasingly frail.In his private life Bill was blessed with two long and happy marriages. He met Barbara Somervaille over the breakfast table at the hostel where they both lived as young Commonwealth public servants. They married in 1957 and had three children, two sons and a daughter. Barbara, like Bill worked initially as a librarian. In line with the norms of the times, she left work prior to the birth of their first child. She had a range of interests besides her family, editing a collection of letters by Bishop Mesac Thomas, the first bishop of the Canberra-Goulburn Anglican diocese (published 1964), and working on a biography of Bishop Ernest Burgmann. While in the UK in the late 1960s she trained as a counsellor, a role that she exercised with Lifeline following the family’s return to Canberra. In 1983, Bill produced a book of her poems under the imprint of the Duyfken Press. After Barbara’s untimely death in 1990, in 1995 he married Angela Hume, a long-standing neighbour, widow of Len Hume and a good friend of Barbara’s. They spent nearly two decades together in loving companionship and travelled widely.Apart from his family, his passion was for books and bibliography. A river of books flowed through his life, and his personal library was substantial. At its core was a treasured and significant collection of private press books, mostly from Australian and English presses, which he gave to the Museum of Printing at the New England Regional Art Gallery in the last months of his life.  He was for many years active in the Bibliographical Society of Australia and New Zealand, convening its 1991 conference in Canberra while serving as president of the society 1991-92, and was a keen collector of bibliographical literature. Members of the conference committee recall his skill in running a committee, evident in the other areas of his life as well. He had the rare knack of genially putting people at their ease but knowing where to draw the line to get decisions made, recalls one colleague. And he was a maker as well as being good with people. His first interest was in letterpress printing. In 1974 he enrolled in an evening printing course at the then Canberra Technical College, and at the same time bought an Adana 5 x 3” table-top platen press, with which he printed the first in what became an unbroken series of Christmas cards which ended only with his death. In 1975 he acquired a larger press, a Chandler & Price 12 x 8” treadle platen manufactured about 1900, which he cherished and for which he found a new working home shortly before he died. The most substantial productions of his Duyfken Press were an edition of The Reformed Library Keeper (1650) by John Dury, published in 1977, and The Moon’s Horn, a collection of Barbara Thorn’s poems illustrated with linocuts by Hilary Archer (1983). He also relished jobbing printing such as marmalade and jam labels, did signs for the band of a nephew, the Neo-Penguins, and for many years printed typographically elaborate letterpress invitations for the Odd Volumes, a congenial and much-valued luncheon club for retired National Library staff he convened after his retirement, on catalogue cards salvaged from the Library. In later years his interest in bookbinding somewhat overtook printing, and he described himself as a hobby printer rather than as the proprietor of a private press. He also took up embroidery and paper marbling, in which his masterful use of colour and strong design sense were apparent.Bill was a member of the Vestry at St David’s Anglican Church in Red Hill for many years, serving for extensive periods as Warden and Treasurer, and embroidered many of the kneelers used there. His imprint as the Duyfken Press reflected both his keen interest in maritime history and his long and happy years living in Jansz Crescent, Griffith.Bill’s son William describes him as a ‘flexible conservative’, something that is strongly apparent in words he wrote in 1987:I believe strongly in the rights of the individual, to freedom of thought, to freedom of expression and to have freedom to be different from others. I believe in the essential goodness of humankind and I am loath to see evil or selfishness in anyone without strong reason. I am distressed when I encounter thoughtlessness, selfishness or lack of concern for the feelings and welfare of others. For me there are many paths to truth (or salvation) not all of which I personally may wish to follow. I have a deep suspicion of fundamentalists and others to whom ‘the truth’ or ‘the one true path’ has been revealed whether in matters of religion, management, finance, or personal relations. I believe the qualities of co-operation, compromise and compassion are fundamental to all facets of our personal and working life.Bill Thorn epitomised qualities of tolerance, wisdom, compassion, generosity and gentleness. He died on 19 August 2014 and is survived by Angela and by his children William, Jane and Benjamin.Michael J. Richards, 'Thorn, William Darbyshire (Bill) (1932–2014)', Obituaries Australia, National Centre of Biography, Australian National University, http://oa.anu.edu.au/obituary/thorn-william-darbyshire-bill-19120/text30693, accessed 9 July 2019.© Copyright Obituaries Australia, 2010-2019
7 August 1932  Richmond, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia

19 August 2014  Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, Australia An initiative of the National Centre of Biography at the Australian National University© Copyright Obituaries Australia, 2010-2019Copyright · Disclaimer · Privacy Policy · Contact Us